Grace, mercy, and peace be unto you from our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.
And again, a portion of our Gospel reading.
this morning
The Pharisees and the scribes grumbled, saying, This man receives sinners and eats with them.
Jesus responded, or what woman, having ten silver coins, if she loses one coin, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek diligently until she finds it?
When she is found she calls together her friends and neighbors saying rejoice with me
where I found the coin that I had lost.
"'Just so I tell you, there is joy before the angels of God.'"
Over one center.
Who repents.
If you'll join me with a word of prayer
Lord God, our Heavenly Father, as we gather before you on this day, as we turn our attention to your word this morning,
We ask that you would reveal to us again today
Your unshakable love for us as your people.
The way that you seek us out wherever we are in our lives, wherever we may be in this world.
We know that your son Jesus Christ came to seek the sinners
And the lost
And even the Pharisees, all of those
Who would listen to his word, all of those who would come to him, all of those?
Who would hear his calling. So, Lord, today, let us hear his calling as well into our lives.
To know and to see our savior once again.
To see what he has done for us.
Calling us out of ourselves, out of our old ways,
and into his light. We give thanks for this calling and we pray in Jesus' name.
Amen.
congregation may be seated
I will try to keep this just a little bit shorter this morning
But really so that we can focus on just one thing.
It's rally day and I think it's good for us to celebrate and to see what God is doing in our midst and we did that already before.
uh before church in our bible class recognizing our teachers and students
Also, considering our congregation and what God is doing here in this place at Mount Calvary,
And the way that he does continue to bring to us
people
Like us, each one of us, that can gather around
This good news.
It's what we do together. We gather around his good news. We share our lives together. We pray together together.
and we worship together just as we are doing this morning. And I hope in the midst of those things as we do this as a family of faith, as God's people,
People
We also rejoice together.
At the appropriate times and to see the goodness of God and what he has done for us and in his calling upon our lives and especially as we realize
As we see and as we sense and as we know
His unshakable love.
For us,
His people.
That's what we see in our passages this morning.
We see the love of a God whose love is
Really unimaginable.
It's beyond what we can understand or comprehend because God's love is patient with his people who run far from him.
God's love is persevering
Not easily growing tired
He keeps seeking and keeps looking
And we see the love of God in its fullest form in his own son, Jesus Christ, given into the world, the one whose words we hear this morning.
As he comes and he deals with difficult people,
That's what he's doing in the passage today.
It's interesting looking at the beginning of this gospel passage, Luke chapter 15. If you know anything about this chapter, it's a significant one in Luke's gospel because we get three parables.
Parable of the lost sheep, the parable of the lost coin,, and then later on a longer parable, which is the parable of the prodigal son.
Actually, we should call it, I think, the parable of the two sons, because that's what we see there, the younger son, the older son.
who takes his money from his father and goes and lives a lavish lifestyle and the older son who's always been home
Who's always been there who's always been obedient
But the older son who ends up outside the feast
At the end of the story outside of the father's house
This chapter is here right in the middle of Luke's gospel to show what Jesus is doing, what he has come for.
He's calling people to follow, to hear, to listen. He's seeking them out.
so he tells these parables to help them to understand but at the beginning here we find an interesting exchange
It says there were tax collectors and sinners drawing near to Jesus. So you have one group of people.
That,
The world has classified in a way.
One group of people, the tax collectors and the sinners, those who were known to be far from God.
That's the idea here.
The tax collectors
And the sinners
But what are they doing?
They're drawing near to hear Jesus.
It should tell us something right there.
The tax collectors and the sinners
And probably they know what they are or who they are
i bet a bunch of people in that category.
Would say
I don't know if I deserve God's love.
I know what type of life
I've lived. I know that some of the things that I've done have not been good, have not been helpful to my neighbor, have not obeyed God's laws. And so,
I'm not sure if I deserve God's love.
And that's exactly what the second group, the Pharisees,
is saying about them. The Pharisees and the scribes grumbled saying,
This man receives sinners.
And eats with them.
So we're saying he's getting too close.
He's spending time with them and he's spending time with the wrong kind of people and not only is he talking to them out in public
He's even going into their homes.
He's even getting a little closer than that, something that's a little bit more intimate, which is getting around a table.
Sharing food, breaking bread,
Perhaps even sharing a prayer
It's getting too close to those people.
But then we have to think for a minute about the ones who are saying these things, the Pharisees and the scribes. They're the ones who are grumbling. And every time they're close to Jesus,
They're grumbling.
They're complaining they don't want to listen they don't want Jesus's word yeah they're there
They're around him, but as far as we can tell,
For the most part, only so that they can pick a fight.
and they are in that second category
They are, we could say,
The righteous ones.
They have followed
The rules.
they have
12 sought out God's laws, which
And obeyed them to the best of their ability.
They are the inside religious class.
They're the people with some power and authority of that day they
They've done what they can to have this outward expression to live a good life and so when they see Jesus coming and and spending time with the tax collectors and sinners they begin to grumble and scoff
scoff at them and say, Jesus, what are you doing? How can you spend time with them? But then, um,
With their next breath they'll say, "Jesus, we..."
We don't like your words either.
we also don't really want anything to do with you even though you shouldn't have anything to do with them.
So we have these two categories of people here around Jesus.
And what is he going to do?
Well, in response to these things, he tells us,
these three parables and i'm going to skip to the last one first for just a moment
The parable of the prodigal son or the parable of the two brothers
And I think if we consider these two groups of people, it might be easy to see who they are in that parable. You have the younger son and he goes to his father and he says, "Father, essentially,
He's saying, "Dad, I wish you weren't here anymore. I wish I wasn't your son. Just give me what is mine. I'm going to go and I'm going to live
And he goes off into a foreign land.
he runs from his father's household he lives however he wants
And I bet he would say, by the end of that experience,
I don't know if I deserve the love.
God
Because by the end of that experience, once he goes and lives exactly how he wants, he ends up far from everything. And everybody, he ends up far from society. He's out with the pigs. Right?
He ends up far from home, from his own earthly father.
He ends up far from his
Heavenly Father,
And I bet at that moment he knows what he's done.
He knows he's a sinner.
And he's very uncertain of whether he's deserving of the father's love.
Any longer.
And yet we see what happens.
Let's get for a minute to the older brother, who at the end of the story, what does he do? He becomes frustrated because his dad,
Loving his younger brother,
Allows him to come back home.
The older brother becomes frustrated. He grumbles and he scoffs and he says, "Dad, why are you loving him? Why are you welcoming him? Why especially are you taking the fattened calf?"
and allowing my brother to come back in.
That's what the older brother says. So you have these two categories of people again. The one who runs off, who runs far from everybody, who runs far from God, who lives his life his own way.
But who probably knows,
He's a sinner.
And then you have the older brother,
who becomes frustrated by his father's love and says, "Don't you know that my younger brother doesn't deserve you?"
So pretty clearly Jesus is speaking to these two groups of people.
I would invite us now for just a moment to consider our own lives.
If each one of us had to put ourselves in one of these categories,
And i would suggest maybe it takes different forms at different times takes different shapes at different times in our lives
Where are we?
Who are we?
Which group are we in?
The younger brother, the older brother,
The tax collectors and the sinners or the pharisees and the scribes
Where are we?
Who are we?
That's what this chapter is here to teach us today.
quickly in our lives we draw up groups and categories we say they're the good people they're the bad people they're the sinners they're the in crowd
They're the religious people. They're the ones who are far off from God. We draw up these categories.
But what Jesus is actually doing in this chapter is he's drawing up a third category.
saying both of these
Are problematic.
But there's one that may be easier to deal with than the other.
we notice who is coming near to him and who's listening to him we notice also in the parable of the two sons which one ends up around the dinner table at the end of the day
The younger son is invited in he experiences the lavish love of his father he understands his sins and his need for forgiveness and repentance and he is brought back in
Act in, invited by the Father, and he comes in praying.
And he rejoices and he gives thanks, but the older brother still...
And the Pharisees also
They're challenged by these things.
The older brother ends up outside the house at the end of the day.
Perhaps because he can't see his own need.
For repentance as well.
He can't see his own need for the father's love.
His hardness of heart.
100% and character keeps him outside of 100%.
But in the middle of all of that, Jesus tells these two parables. And what I really want to leave us with this morning,
It's the joy that is found here because no matter what
These two categories
All
Are far
from God.
All are far from
the grace of God unless
They experienced the love of Jesus Christ.
All have fallen short.
Of the glory of God have broken his commands have run from him in various ways have become hard of heart.
And so in the middle of all that Jesus tells these two stories, these two parables, one of the lost sheep and the shepherd, who Jesus is, of course, the shepherd realizes one is lost and he goes running off.
Running off, he leaves the others behind and he goes running off because he loves this one sheep and he goes to look for it and to find it and to track it down and he leaves.
He gives everything he has in order to go find that one sheep.
He brings it back home, and when he does, he says to all the people that he can find, he says to his friends, come and rejoice with me.
For the thing that I had lost, that which was far off has now been found.
Come and rejoice with me.
And then the woman who's lost her coin.
Now we may have to put this into a modern context
It probably isn't a nickel or a dime. I'm not sure how hard we would
Search for one of those.
But imagine a silver coin.
Or a gold coin.
Especially if it was one that was maybe handed down to you from your parents or
One that you had purchased at great price
And that one became lost. Well, what would you do?
As the woman does she searches her whole house she turns over every piece of furniture she's looking everywhere frantically because this thing of great value of extreme and immense value this thing of life changing
Life-changing value.
Has been lost
She finds it and she goes to her friends and she says, "Rejoice with me."
Come and celebrate and see.
That which was lost has now been found.
This is what Jesus is saying and how he's summarizing his ministry for every single person.
Both of these categories.
The religious types
Who feel a bit self-righteous
And the sinners
who have strayed far from God,
Jesus loves them.
Jesus seeks them
And Jesus holds them up as people, as children of God, as people of great value, as people of dignity created in the image of God and says, "These are the ones I have come to seek. These are the ones I have come to seek."
These are the ones that I'm now giving myself for and come and see what I'm doing for them. And Jesus ends up giving his own life. He gives everything he has. He gives his own being. Amen.
His life, all that he is, upon the cross.
But then there is rejoicing.
In heaven.
We can't overstate this.
Rejoicing in heaven at every one
Every individual, every person who hears the good news, every person who Christ claims is his own, everyone who is washed in the blood, everyone who hears the word of forgiveness.
Everyone who understands
That they are now a child of god there is rejoicing in heaven
That's why we rejoice as well.
We believe that this is true for us and not of our own doing. What did the coin do for itself to be found?
Nothing. What did the sheep do for itself to be found?
They got lost.
Added nothing else.
We rejoice because we
Have been found by a God who loves us deeply.
And we celebrate in this and we don't take it for granted and we give thanks that God continues to seek and search out the lost.
And we continue in this work as his church of proclaiming this good news that others might hear it as well.
This is the message today that we might rejoice with one another in what Christ has done for us, that he has given all.
In order to seek out his people.
Thank you. Thanks for this good news.
I pray all of this now in Jesus' name.
Amen.
I invite the congregation to stand at this time
And may the peace of god which passes all understanding keep our hearts and minds in christ jesus our lord